Hello everybody and welcome back.
In the last lecture we have a look at the dope sheet Ed..
And it's not by itself.
It comes with a partner.
If we go and switch to it now the graph editor.
Now the graph editor is different to the dope sheet.
Ed simply because it allows us to change the transition between those key frames.
Let's have a look specifically at this point where our lamp is landing.
Now if we look purely at the up and down part of this animation so we're looking at the z axis which
is this blue line remember here we've got the base selected.
We're talking about the base control bone only.
Let's highlight the blue line and you do that not by clicking on the line but clicking on one of the
control points.
When we click on a control point we get a handle much like how we used to controlling curves.
And as you've probably guessed if we tweak that it will change how the transition happens.
In fact if we go nuts and do something like that set the play head back to the beginning let's see what
happens it's going to shoot up and come back down again because that's exactly what this graph is doing.
Let's talk about this a little.
How does gravity work.
Well because it was simulating gravity at this point.
We don't have to by the way we could turn off the animation and turn it back on later on and let it
The Lamp fall absolutely naturally.
But in this case we want to be explicit about how our lamp is moving.
If we have a look at this it jumps up and it doesn't it does slow down as it reaches the top.
We can see it curves off and then it starts falling back down again.
But look at this.
By the time it lands on the ground which is frame 92 it started slowing down even before it hit the
ground.
That's not how animation should work.
We should hit the ground with a thud and without slowing down before we've hit the ground.
We've got no rocket boosters to cushion our landing after all.
So you may be tempted to grab this and grab one of the handles and do that but then we end up with a
more of a spring effect with it going into the block the bench underneath.
So that's not ideal but we've just learned how we make a spring effect.
So we may want that as it impacts the ground we may want a few kind of micro bounces to just show the
viewer that it wasn't just a straight impact.
It was more of a hard landing and then a little bit of a bump.
So how do we go ahead and do that.
Well first of all we need to change the type of handle that we are using.
So with the control points selected I'm able to press the V key when I do that.
It gives us a series of options at the moment.
It will be set it's automatic.
However if we change it's a vector we can say it was a straight down impact.
And at that point we can have this speeding up more naturally so let's just go back and review the animation
comes down and hits the ground there and we can zoom in and check that that was the impact point which
it is.
So at this point in time we could actually make this a little bit steeper and have it fall sooner or
once again we can grab the main control point and move it back slightly.
Let's say to about there to make this falling a bit steeper as it comes through.
Let's have a look at how that looks.
I haven't a clue of it's going to work.
Let's go ahead and press play.
So we've gone up and it's landed very suddenly.
I missed that because I wasn't zoomed out to the right level.
Let's just click OK.
Now it looks like the jump the ever jump definitely lasts too long.
And you can see here now that we've got the curves in place and we're able to control the transitions
between each key frame.
We can start adding a lot more subtlety to the movement especially when it comes to bouncing.
I don't know if we've got quite enough time.
I mean that does land and then cut off.
I think that's going into our bench.
Yes it is slightly.
So we might have to skip or move a few frames but the other thing that we can do right here right now
is grab that key frame and press shift and the and duplicate it and we get another one and we can shift
in the again and we can change the magnitude here.
Now I'm exaggerating and not really setting up the key frames with any thought as such but that it also
looks like something is bouncing.
Let's see if that works out.
This might be a happy accident or we might need to refine it a little further.
Let's go ahead and do that.
This press space to play.
Yeah.
Okay.
That was far too exaggerated.
But you get the points.
That looks like he's landed on something very very spongy and it's dampened the effect.
So let's come in and lessen the heights on all of these by minimizing the control handles.
So that's our first one or second bump should be closer together and not as high.
So something like that and our third bump should once again be even closer together.
Something like that and be half the height again.
So I don't know if that's going to work.
But you can see here how we can very quickly build up a bit.
Oh yeah.
That looks much better.
I still think it needs a bit of refining but as you can see here.
Zoom out and play it again yes.
That's starting to look much much better.
And of course armed with that knowledge you know it's time for a challenge.
OK so your challenge is to use the graph and it's to refine your lamps movement.
Now remember so far we've only played with one axis of one bone so far.
So there's plenty more that we can play with as well.
Expect this to take a while.
I probably spend the next half an hour 40 minutes as she playing with mine.
I'm not gonna show you all of that some of it was me just moving.
Tiny tiny changes yet and the bit to absorb the net.
They expect that to happen to yourself as well.
And one of the best piece of advice I can give you at the moment is if you are struggling it's probably
best to leave it for a bit go do some other modelling or just take a few minutes break and then come
back to the animation again.
One of the things that will happen with this is you end up iterating over and over the same animation
and just sometimes it's better to come back with a fresh head.
So go ahead pulls a video now and use the graph editor to refine your lamps movement okay.
Everybody welcome back.
Let's go hop on over into blender and refine our lamps movement.
Hello everybody and welcome back.
We've got a lot of tweaking to do here and a lot of the time it'll be just moving control points backwards
and forwards to get more natural movement.
Now not to say that this is going to be an easy process or one that's going to work quite as well as
I would want it to.
But we can start moving around and tweaking things as we're landing.
We can highlight multiple things at once that something to bear in mind if we need to.
And I'm going to lessen all of these down to that and perhaps even that last bump isn't needed.
But let's try that let's go back a little and this is what the next 5 10 minutes is going to be and
we can see here that we appear to just transition sideways too much at that point.
So this way backwards and forwards is the y axis going to drag this point here so it lines up with the
peak because what we don't want is it's sliding whilst it's on the peak looks much better straight away
and then it's continually continuing to slide.
And then when it hits the ground I think another bump would be great.
That's the beginning of the jump.
I want to focus on you know if I could do this in reverse this bounce bounce bounce in reverse perhaps
I could do that.
In fact that's something you can do if you've got a bounce bounce bounce that you like let's say here
and it's the wrong way round obviously.
But I can duplicate it and then move it I can duplicate that.
And here we go and move it to the appropriate location which is really early on.
Now I want it going the other way so I'm just gonna move it over here so it's approximately in the right
place but then I'm going to scale it and push it through itself that would invert it completely.
But how about if we only do that on the x axis itself.
Now when I say x axis here I'm not talking about the model or the bones coordinates I specifically talking
about the graph in front of us X being horizontal left to right and Y being vertical up and down.
So when I press X and minus one we should get an inversion.
Let's see what happens by just leaving it there not a convincing bounce but it's a reasonable stance.
In fact I'm not sure if I scaled that appropriately or I pushed it through itself too much the I think
I'm gonna have to tweak those things manually.
That was the idea that the bounce would get bigger and bigger and bigger before we jump.
It looks like we jump a lot sooner.
Anyway so now it's a matter of grabbing these points again and pulling them back.
Let's say to them let's see what happens when we do it like that case.
It's far too frequent.
By that if I bring this down we can have a look from the side.
Come back again.
It's just jumping up and down at the wrong point.
I think that's good that's clear.
There is something that delete those altogether and just have a look at this frequency at the beginning.
That's not quite right there.
As we push off I think that's the problem.
I want.
The lamp itself to stretch out more before we actually leave the ground because at the moment we're
leaving the ground huddled up and then we're stretching out.
So let's leave that.
Let's grow and grab where we leave the ground and move it a bit further and I'm going to lock it here.
So I'm not changing its vertical position along the x axis to maybe here.
Let's see what that looks like okay.
We've got a bit of Y transition here.
So let's go ahead grab a point duplicate it and just bring it back.
Level with the others.
Let's see how that works.
That does look better but it's a bit more of a Superman's take off because we've not adjusted for the
rotation backwards and forwards.
So at this point in time you can see that it's just about iteration going through and making sure that
you've got key frames lining up.
That's really important.
But now it's time for me to knuckle down and just go through the process of getting this beginning jumped
sorted and then I'll be happy with most of this animation
that's fine and at this point we're gradually taking off that's we're not accelerating.
Again we do not have rocket boosters here.
We've got to suddenly go up.
And again if we rotate it like this it will sponge into the ground which looks great for a trampoline.
Not so great for us.
So we can press V and set it's a vector now or leave the ground much quicker as you can see here.
Our lines aren't quite right.
Let's see how it looks.
Well no they're not.
They're not lined up properly at all.
So let's have a look at this again.
Jump up and land down.
I think the duration is about right.
But the positioning as we move is not.
So let's bring this Y transition back to here.
And I think once again we're going to have to adjust here specifically this one this handle going to
have to make that a vector and then level out this one here in fact just making it nice and short should
help making sure we don't go backwards.
So it would look really odd if that was the case so we jump up here and then we just go up instead of
sideways.
That's our problem.
Let's grab this point here.
G x and bring it back
that's much better.
Brilliant.
Oh and fall off and there is a little bit of a jump there as we're going.
I think that's pretty neat.
The translate translation across the screen.
That's quite smooth that's play it from the beginning.
So jump.
I'm liking that jump.
Yeah.
Fall off and I think we need a little bit of a bump there.
Now going to see I tried it earlier but I'm gonna see if I can grab these here.
Duplicate them and move them to the appropriate location further on landing.
So you've got a little bit of a bump there.
Let's see if we can just place these around the same area perhaps even overwrite some of them.
Bring that down.
Okay let's see what happens here at us a bit better.
So hitting the ground here.
Let's go ahead grab this one that goes into the ground.
Let's bring it out again.
Make it quite steep.
Oh hang on a minute.
This is important.
We have a look at what happens at this point when we move this control point.
It's moving it on the bones.
That access.
That's not what we want.
They're doing so.
That's the lead that key frames those nonexistent anymore.
We're talking about.
It's why transition here it's going to shift it up and down there we go.
That's what we want.
So let's go ahead.
You okay.
I'm going to make up something like that.
Let's see if that works.
Yes.
There we go.
Hits the ground and bumps backwards and forwards and we really want a corresponding one for the base
itself at roughly the right timing as well so we can select both of these so we can see the timing on
both the top and bottom.
But notice we've got some highlighted and some not.
This is the top one.
If we go ahead and select that we also get the one that we were working on before as well.
And we can see here that the timing doesn't match up and because the timing doesn't match up it's kind
of oscillating that may be something you want to do but it may also just ruin the illusion.
So I'm going to align things up and see how it works.
After doing that and remove the extra key frames just like geometry too many key frames can cause you
issues not least because it becomes a pain in the backside to manage everything and move that back slightly.
And that's the largest one than a smaller one.
OK.
So I think I've adjusted it how I want it to land so let's go and preview just this end part here.
Still notch I think it's the why transition that's causing me the problem here.
So this area at the top here I'm going to delete that last key frame.
Let's see if that works now.
Yes it does.
That works much better.
Is that shifting forward.
That didn't make much sense to me.
Still think he's bouncing just a little bit high.
So I'm going to have to really zoom and tweak these parts here is it the first bounce that's too high.
Yeah I think that first bounce is too high.
So again don't be shy tweak things.
And I also don't think we hit the ground either.
That's not going to help.
Let's see if that works.
Yes.
That's much better much more subtle.
Let's try it one last time.
Yep.
Perfect.
So let's review it over at the very beginning and this is one of the key things that you'll just have
to get used to doing is going over and over and over your animation.
Let's make sure we can see it.
In fact let's make that area full screen.
Let's see our lamp jumping around
oh splat.
Yes.
Much much better.
And of course we can turn off the overlays to see that in its full glory perhaps fill up the screen
a little bit more with it.
So it's a brilliant jump to begin with and then slips slide.
Bang brilliant.
So there we go we've got our animated lamp really coming together now with some unique animations.
Please share your work over in the discussions I'm really looking forward to seeing how you're getting
on and I'll see you all in the next lecture.